blog: maven troubleshooting story (#1424)
questdb/questdb.io: blog/2023-02-28-maven-troubleshooting.mdx

---
title: "The Tale of Troubleshooting: Unstable Builds and Open Source Infrastructure"
author: Jaromir Hamala
author_title: QuestDB Team
author_url: https://github.com/jerrinot
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/jerrinot
description: A story about troubleshooting and fixing an issue in Apache Maven
keywords:
  - maven
  - troubleshooting
  - CI/CD
  - open source
  - engineering
tags: [maven, troubleshooting, CI/CD, open source, engineering]
slug: maven-troubleshooting-open-source
image: /img/blog/2023-02-28/xkcd_dependency.png
---

Donald Knuth [famously wrote](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/356635.356640) that
Premature Optimization is the root of all evil. I, for one, believe that all

> evil comes from spuriously failing builds. Nothing steals my confidence in a

Reviewer: Since we added CI/CD as a keyword, could we add it to the intro:

```suggestion
evil comes from spuriously failing CI/CD builds. Nothing steals my confidence in a
```

Author: nah, this would feel very forced in this context. it can be any build. even a manually triggered build.

project as quickly as builds alternating between green and red for no reason.

> This is a story about unstable builds, troubleshooting, and perhaps most
> importantly: My way to thank all contributors to basic software infrastructure -
> the infrastructure we all use and take for granted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a story about unstable builds and troubleshooting. More
importantly, this story is written to thank all contributors to basic software infrastructure -
the infrastructure we all use and take for granted.
```

<!--truncate-->

import Banner from "@theme/Banner"

<Banner
  alt="xkcd comic - Someday ImageMagick will finally break for good and we'll have a long period of scrambling as we try to reassemble civilization from the rubble."
  height={433}
  src="/img/blog/2023-02-28/xkcd_dependency.png"
  width={650}

> ></Banner>

Reviewer: preview not picking the latest image

Author: what do you mean?

## Surprise in logs

Upon logging into
[Azure Pipelines](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-gb/products/devops/pipelines/)
to review the logs of multiple failed builds, I mentally braced myself for a
potentially arduous troubleshooting session. I suspected that a race condition

> was the culprit, causing non-deterministic outcomes. Therefore, I was surprised
> when I discovered the actual reasons for the recent build failures. They were
> all similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
was the culprit, causing non-deterministic outcomes. Therefore, I was surprised
to discover the actual reasons for the recent build failures. They were
all similar to this:
```

![A picture of Yoda saying: "Use Google, You Must. Easy, it is. Answer, it shall provide.](/img/blog/2023-02-28/yoda.jpg)

Eventually, I stumbled upon [this issue](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/WAGON-545).

It says that Azure Pipelines kill idle connections, which does not play nicely
with the habit of Maven to pool and re-use HTTP connections. It was consistent
with what I saw in builds logs: Maven started tests, which ran for 20+ minutes
and passed successfully. Then Maven wanted to download the Clean Plugin to do
something else, but the download attempt failed, which killed the whole build.

There was still one question unanswered: Why have we started getting this error
only recently? Well, I had an explanation for this too: We keep adding tests, so
they run longer. Azure Pipelines kill connections because the total test
duration exceeds the idle connection timeout. It all made perfect sense.

I also found a Maven configuration property to restrict the Time-To-Live of
connections in the pool. The Maven issue I found said:

> Azure users shall set the TTL to 240 seconds or less.

So I [sent a Pull Request](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/pull/3012) to set

> TTL to 30s, announced it in company Slack and felt good about myself :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TTL to 30s, announced it in company Slack, and felt good about myself :)
```

    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083070Z at jdk.internal.reflect.DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.invoke (DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.java:43)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083580Z at java.lang.reflect.Method.invoke (Method.java:566)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083980Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.launchEnhanced (Launcher.java:282)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6084390Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.launch (Launcher.java:225)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6084800Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.mainWithExitCode (Launcher.java:406)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6085190Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.main (Launcher.java:347)
```

It looks like a typically long and tedious Java stack trace. I noticed there was
nothing about "Wagon". I knew [Wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/) was a
Maven component to download dependencies. Even my first fix attempt
[configured a Wagon-related property](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/pull/3012/files#diff-1494e9436657033af9f4bc2367589b709b4ecc2cf467a525bb99feef983f87baR21):
`-Dmaven.wagon.httpconnectionManager.ttlSeconds=30`

> So it was suspicious I could not see anything Wagon-related in the exception

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So it was suspicious that I could not see anything Wagon-related in the exception
```

  {
      switch ( RETRY_HANDLER_CLASS )
      {
          case "default":
              if ( StringUtils.isEmpty( RETRY_HANDLER_EXCEPTIONS ) )
              {
                  return new DefaultHttpRequestRetryHandler(
                          RETRY_HANDLER_COUNT, RETRY_HANDLER_REQUEST_SENT_ENABLED );
              }
              return new DefaultHttpRequestRetryHandler(
                      RETRY_HANDLER_COUNT, RETRY_HANDLER_REQUEST_SENT_ENABLED, getNonRetryableExceptions() )
              {
              };
          case "standard":
              return new StandardHttpRequestRetryHandler( RETRY_HANDLER_COUNT, RETRY_HANDLER_REQUEST_SENT_ENABLED );
          default:
              try
              {
                  final ClassLoader classLoader = AbstractHttpClientWagon.class.getClassLoader();
                  return HttpRequestRetryHandler.class.cast( classLoader.loadClass( RETRY_HANDLER_CLASS )
                                                                        .getConstructor().newInstance() );
              }
              catch ( final Exception e )
              {
                  throw new IllegalArgumentException( e );
              }
      }
  }
```

> The new

Reviewer: This is a dangling phrase?

Author: good one!

        } else if (MAVEN_RESOLVER_TRANSPORT_WAGON.equals(transport)) {
            // Make sure (whatever extra priority is set) that wagon is selected
            configProps.put(WAGON_TRANSPORTER_PRIORITY_KEY, RESOLVER_MAX_PRIORITY);
        } else if (!MAVEN_RESOLVER_TRANSPORT_AUTO.equals(transport)) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unknown resolver transport '" + transport
                    + "'. Supported transports are: " + MAVEN_RESOLVER_TRANSPORT_WAGON + ", "
                    + MAVEN_RESOLVER_TRANSPORT_NATIVE + ", " + MAVEN_RESOLVER_TRANSPORT_AUTO);
        }
```

I figured out that forcing the old Wagon transport was as simple as passing
`-Dmaven.resolver.transport=wagon` to my build command. I
[added the flag](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/pull/3014/commits/5f097649fab2716032cd686c6bd586479bf088b1)
and waited eagerly for the build results. And it was a success! The first build
passed, then a second, third, and fourth. All builds were green! Such a relief.
Our precious builds were deterministic again. Problem Solved! Or not?

## Contributing Back

We all consume open source. Apache Maven itself is open source. It’s so

> ubiquitous that finding a Java developer who wouldn’t use it at least for some
> projects is impossible. Maven is a basic software infrastructure we all take for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ubiquitous that it is impossible to find a Java developer who has never used it. Maven is a basic software infrastructure we all take for
```

granted. It’s not backed by a large corporation or by a VC-funded startup.

> Volunteers maintain it. I felt the least I could do was report my experience to
> the Maven team so they could clarify whether it was intentional behavior or a
> bug. I [opened a ticket](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/MNG-7708) and wanted to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Volunteers maintain it. I felt the least I could do was report my experience to
the Maven team so they could clarify whether it was an intentional behavior or a
bug. I [opened a ticket](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/MNG-7708) and wanted to
```

move on.

> The same evening I saw one of the Maven maintainers created a

Author: Grammarly kept suggesting the exact change. I thought it was nonsense. 
And now it's both you and Grammarly against me -> I should study English! :)))

    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083070Z at jdk.internal.reflect.DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.invoke (DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.java:43)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083580Z at java.lang.reflect.Method.invoke (Method.java:566)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6083980Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.launchEnhanced (Launcher.java:282)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6084390Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.launch (Launcher.java:225)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6084800Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.mainWithExitCode (Launcher.java:406)
    2023-02-23T11:20:01.6085190Z at org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher.main (Launcher.java:347)
```

It looks like a typically long and tedious Java stack trace. I noticed there was
nothing about "Wagon". I knew [Wagon](https://maven.apache.org/wagon/) was a
Maven component to download dependencies. Even my first fix attempt
[configured a Wagon-related property](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/pull/3012/files#diff-1494e9436657033af9f4bc2367589b709b4ecc2cf467a525bb99feef983f87baR21):

> `-Dmaven.wagon.httpconnectionManager.ttlSeconds=30`

Reviewer: "Even my fist fix attempt [...]"
I don't understand this. The first attempt has done something to Wagon so you expected to see something about it?

Author: I wanted to say this: The first (unsuccessful) fix attempt was poking a Wagon-related property too.

Author: but this would make it clearer?
> Even my previous fix attempt...

wdyt?

Reviewer: Actually ignore me I read it from the source and automatically skip the anchor text for some reason...

Eventually, I stumbled upon this issue:
[https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/WAGON-545](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/WAGON-545)

It says that Azure Pipelines kill idle connections, which does not play nicely
with the habit of Maven to pool and re-use HTTP connections. It was consistent
with what I saw in builds logs: Maven started tests, which ran for 20+ minutes
and passed successfully. Then Maven wanted to download the Clean Plugin to do
something else, but the download attempt failed, which killed the whole build.

There was still one question unanswered: Why have we started getting this error
only recently? Well, I had an explanation for this too: We keep adding tests, so
they run longer. Azure Pipelines kill connections because the total test
duration exceeds the idle connection timeout. It all made perfect sense.

I also found a Maven configuration property to restrict the Time-To-Live of
connections in the pool. The Maven issue I found said:

> Azure users shall set the TTL to 240 seconds or less.

So I [sent a Pull Request](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/pull/3012) to set
TTL to 30s, announced it in company Slack and felt good about myself :)

> ![A screenshot from Slack where I say: the Maven connection reset issues should be fixed for all new PR builds. Let me know if you experience it again.](/img/blog/2023-02-28/slack1.png)

Reviewer: Looking at the screenshot, could we get one without:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/107401731/221588631-7eb1cf54-40f9-4a39-ab0c-cd2d597922bf.png)

Author: good catch!

It took less than 30 minutes, and we got another failure:
![A screenshot from Slack where my colleague says: It didn't help](/img/blog/2023-02-28/slack2.png)

The failure had the same cause as before. The fix did not work. Back to square
one.

## The investigation, Part II

Blind Googling combined with a bit of logical reasoning failed to produce

> results. There was only one answer: **WE NEED MOAR LOGS!** Running Maven with

Reviewer: I was not sure if this is a wordplay that I don't understand:

```suggestion
results. There was only one answer: **WE NEED MORE LOGS!** Running Maven with
```

Author: Yeah, this is intentional. I was trying to be funny. Maybe I come across as childish instead. https://www.dictionary.com/e/slang/moar/
So up to you, dear editor :)

Reviewer: Ha let's keep it.
